Document has 18 pages.


--- Page 1 ---
International Classi ﬁcation of Retinopathy of
Prematurity, Third Edition
Michael F. Chiang, MD,1Graham E. Quinn, MD, MSCE,2Alistair R. Fielder, FRCP,3Susan R. Ostmo, MS,4
R.V. Paul Chan, MD,5Audina Berrocal, MD,6Gil Binenbaum, MD, MSCE,2Michael Blair, MD,7,8
J. Peter Campbell, MD, MPH,4Antonio Capone, Jr., MD,9Yi Chen, MD,10Shuan Dai, MD,11Anna Ells, MD,12
Brian W. Fleck, MD,13William V. Good, MD,14M. Elizabeth Hartnett, MD,15Gerd Holmstrom, MD, PhD,16
Shunji Kusaka, MD, PhD,17Andrés Kychenthal, MD,18Domenico Lepore, MD,19Birgit Lorenz, MD, PhD,20,21
Maria Ana Martinez-Castellanos, MD,22S¸engül Özdek, MD,23Dupe Ademola-Popoola, MD,24
James D. Reynolds, MD,25Parag K. Shah, MD,26Michael Shapiro, MD,7Andreas Stahl, MD,27
Cynthia Toth, MD,28Anand Vinekar, MD, PhD,29Linda Visser, MD,30David K. Wallace, MD, MPH,31
Wei-Chi Wu, MD, PhD,32Peiquan Zhao, MD,33Andrea Zin, MD, PhD34
Purpose: The International Classi ﬁcation of Retinopathy of Prematurity is a consensus statement that cre-
ates a standard nomenclature for classi ﬁcation of retinopathy of prematurity (ROP). It was initially published in
1984, expanded in 1987, and revisited in 2005. This article presents a third revision, the International Classi ﬁ-
cation of Retinopathy of Prematurity, Third Edition (ICROP3), which is now required because of challenges suchas: (1) concerns about subjectivity in critical elements of disease classi ﬁcation; (2) innovations in ophthalmic
imaging; (3) novel pharmacologic therapies (e.g., anti evascular endothelial growth factor agents) with unique
regression and reactivation features after treatment compared with ablative therapies; and (4) recognition that
patterns of ROP in some regions of the world do not ﬁt neatly into the current classi ﬁcation system.
Design: Review of evidence-based literature, along with expert consensus opinion.
Participants: International ROP expert committee assembled in March 2019 representing 17 countries and
comprising 14 pediatric ophthalmologists and 20 retinal specialists, as well as 12 women and 22 men.
Methods: The committee was initially divided into 3 subcommittees dacute phase, regression or reac-
tivation, and imaging deach of which used iterative videoconferences and an online message board to identify
key challenges and approaches. Subsequently, the entire committee used iterative videoconferences, 2 in-personmultiday meetings, and an online message board to develop consensus on classi ﬁcation.
Main Outcome Measures: Consensus statement.
Results: The ICROP3 retains current de ﬁnitions such as zone (location of disease), stage (appearance of
disease at the avascular evascular junction), and circumferential extent of disease. Major updates in the ICROP3
include re ﬁned classi ﬁcation metrics (e.g., posterior zone II ,notch, subcategorization of stage 5, and recognition
that a continuous spectrum of vascular abnormality exists from normal to plus disease). Updates also include the
deﬁnition of aggressive ROP to replace aggressive-posterior ROP because of increasing recognition that
aggressive disease may occur in larger preterm infants and beyond the posterior retina, particularly in regions of
the world with limited resources. ROP regression and reactivation are described in detail, with additional
description of long-term sequelae.
Conclusions: These principles may improve the quality and standardization of ROP care worldwide and may
provide a foundation to improve research and clinical care. Ophthalmology 2021;
-:1e18 Published by Elsevier on
behalf of the American Academy of Ophthalmology
In 1953, Reese et al1published a classi ﬁcation of retrolental
ﬁbroplasia. By 1984, the International Classi ﬁcation of
Retinopathy of Prematurity (ICROP) was developed by 23ophthalmologists from 11 countries.2This classi ﬁcation of
acute retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) facilitated the ﬁrst
multicenter clinical treatment study (the Cryotherapy forROP Study), demonstrating that ROP could be treated
successfully,3thereby establishing the need for screening
worldwide to identify a major cause of preventablechildhood blindness.In 1987, the ICROP was expanded to include retinal
detachment,4and in 2005, it was revisited to incorporate
advances during the intervening years.5Now, a third
revision, the International Classi ﬁcation of Retinopathy of
Prematurity, Third Edition (ICROP3), is required for
several reasons. First, certain components of the ICROPare subjective and open to interpretation. Second,
innovations in ophthalmic imaging have occurred. Third,
introduction of anti evascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) therapy has presented new challenges associated
1 Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American Academy of Ophthalmology https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2021.05.031
ISSN 0161-6420/21

--- Page 2 ---
with recognition of clinical features characteristic of
posttreatment regression and reactivation.6,7Finally, the
pattern of ROP in regions of the world with limited
resources is not adequately described by the current
classi ﬁcation system. Key features and changes in the
ICROP3, which are intended to address these challenges,are summarized in Table 1 . Each eye should be classi ﬁed
using the following examination parameters, de ﬁned in
this article: zone, plus disease, stage, and extent. Ifaggressive ROP (A-ROP) is present, it should be noted.
Location of Vascularization: Zone
Retinal vascularization commences around the thirteenthweek of gestation, proceeding centrifugally from the peri-
papillary region to the peripheral retina, which is fully
vascularized by approximately term.8The location of retinal
vascularization provides an indication of infant maturity and
risk of ROP developing. The developing vasculature is
lobular and closer to the optic disc nasally thantemporally,9but as a practical matter, the state of
vascularization (i.e., the zone) is recorded as circles withthe optic disc at the center.
Three concentric retinal zones are centered on the disc
and extend to the ora serrata ( Fig 1 ). The location of the
most posterior retinal vascularization or ROP lesiondenotes the zone for the eye. The most posterior region,
zone I, is de ﬁned by a circle with radius twice the
estimated distance from the optic disc center to the fovealcenter. Zone II is a ring-shaped region extending nasally
from the outer limit of zone I to the nasal ora serrata and
with a similar distance temporally, superiorly, and inferi-orly. The committee de ﬁned a region of 2 disc diameters
peripheral to the zone I border as posterior zone II to
indicate potentially more worrisome disease than ROP in themore peripheral zone II ( Table 1 ).
The committee introduced the term notch to describe an
incursion by the ROP lesion of 1 to 2 clock hours along the
horizontal meridian into a more posterior zone than theremainder of the retinopathy. When present, this should be
Table 1. Summary of Key Components of International Classi ﬁcation of Retinopathy of Prematurity, 3rd Edition Classi ﬁcation
1. Zone.
a. De ﬁnition of 3 retinal zones centered on the optic disc. The location of the most posterior retinal vascularization or ROP lesion denotes the
zone for the eye.
b. De ﬁnition of a posterior zone II region that begins at the margin between zone I and zone II and extends into zone II for 2 disc diameters. *
c. The term notch is used to describe an incursion by the ROP lesion of 1 e2 clock hours into a more posterior zone. The ROP zone for such eyes
should be noted by the most posterior zone of retinal vascularization with the quali ﬁer“notch ”(e.g., “zone I secondary to notch ”).*
2. Plus and Preplus Disease. Plus disease is de ﬁned by the appearance of dilation and tortuosity of retinal vessels, and preplus disease is de ﬁned by
abnormal vascular dilation, tortuosity insuf ﬁcient for plus disease, or both. Recognition that retinal vascular changes in ROP represent a
continuous spectrum from normal to preplus to plus disease, with sample images demonstrating this range. *These changes should be assessed by
vessels within zone I, rather than from only vessels within the ﬁeld of narrow-angle photographs and rather than from the number of quadrants of
abnormality. *
3. Stage of Acute Disease (Stages 1 e3). Stage of acute disease is de ﬁned by the appearance of a structure at the vascular eavascular juncture as stage 1
(demarcation line), stage 2 (ridge), and stage 3 (extraretinal neovascular proliferation or ﬂat neovascularization). If more than 1 ROP stage is
present, the eye is classi ﬁed by the most severe stage.
4. Aggressive ROP. The term aggressive-posterior ROP was used previously to describe a severe, rapidly progressive form of ROP located in posterior
zones I or II. Because of increasing recognition that this may occur beyond the posterior retina and in larger preterm infants, particularly in region s
of the world with limited resources, the Committee recommends the new term aggressive ROP. *
5. Retinal Detachment (Stages 4 and 5).
a. Stages of retinal detachment are de ﬁned as stage 4 (partial: 4A with fovea attached, 4B with fovea detached) and stage 5 (total).
b. De ﬁnition of stage 5 subcategories: stage 5A, in which the optic disc is visible by ophthalmoscopy (suggesting open-funnel detachment); stage
5B, in which the optic disc is not visible because of retrolental ﬁbrovascular tissue or closed-funnel detachment; and stage 5C, in which stage
5B is accompanied by anterior segment changes (e.g., marked anterior chamber shallowing, iridocorneolenticular adhesions, corneal opaci-
ﬁcation), suggesting closed-funnel con ﬁguration. *Additional descriptors of funnel con ﬁguration (e.g., open-closed) may be applied if clinically
useful.
6. Extent of Disease. De ﬁned as 12 sectors in using clock-hour designations.
7. Regression. De ﬁnition of ROP regression and its sequelae, whether spontaneous or after laser or anti evascular endothelial growth factor treatment.
Regression can be complete or incomplete. Location and extent of peripheral avascular retina (PAR) should be documented. *
8. Reactivation. De ﬁnition and description of nomenclature representing ROP reactivation after treatment, which may include new ROP lesions and
vascular changes. When reactivation of ROP stages occurs, the modi ﬁer reactivated (e.g., “reactivated stage 2 ”) is recommended. *
9. Long-Term Sequelae. Emphasized beyond previous versions of the ICROP, including sequelae such as late retinal detachments, PAR, macular
anomalies, retinal vascular changes, and glaucoma.
ICROP ¼International Classi ﬁcation of Retinopathy of Prematurity; PAR ¼persistent avascular retina; ROP ¼retinopathy of prematurity
Each eye should be classi ﬁed based on zone, plus disease, stage, and extent. If aggressive ROP is present, it should be noted.
*Key changes compared with previous ICROP publications.Ophthalmology Volume -, Number -, Month 2021
2

--- Page 3 ---
recorded by the most posterior zone of retinal vasculariza-
tion with the quali ﬁer“secondary to notch ”(Table 1 ). For
example, ROP in zone II in most places, but with a
temporal notch extending into zone I, should be noted as
“zone I secondary to notch, ”thereby distinguishing it
from an eye in which most disease is present in zone I.
Zone III is the residual crescent of peripheral retina that
extends beyond zone II. To determine that ROP is in zoneIII, the ophthalmologist must ascertain that the nasal vesselsare vascularized to the ora serrata and no ROP is present in
the 2 nasal-most clock hours ( Fig 1 , nasally).
Practically, the temporal extent of zone I may be esti-
mated using a 28-diopter (D) lens. For example, by placing
the nasal edge of the optic disc at one edge of the view, the
limit of zone I is approximately at the temporal edge of theview. With retinal photography, the fovea may not be
clearly identi ﬁable in premature infants before 39 weeks ’
postmenstrual age,
10e12so the foveal location may be
approximated as the center of the macula.
Plus and Preplus Disease
Severe ROP is associated with dilation and tortuosity of theposterior retinal vessels, termed plus disease in 1982.13A
narrow-angle representative retinal photograph for plus
disease was selected in the ICROP 1984.2A different
photograph was selected for the Cryotherapy for ROPStudy and subsequent clinical trials to represent the
minimum severity of vascular dilation and tortuosity
necessary for plus disease.3,14In the ICROP 2005, preplus
disease was de ﬁned to represent retinal vascular dilation
and tortuosity that is abnormal, but insuf ﬁcient for plus
disease.5Of note, the original ICROP description of plus
disease in 1984 included features of vascular engorgement
of the iris, poor pupillary dilation, and peripheral retinalvascular engorgement with vitreous haze,2which are now
recognized as signs of advanced disease but are notnecessary for plus disease diagnosis.
The committee recommends that the plus disease spectrum
be determined from vessels within zone I, rather than fromonly vessels within the ﬁeld of narrow-angle photographs and
rather than from the number of quadrants of abnormality
(Table 1 ).
4,5,15,16Representative examples of preplus disease
(Fig 2 AeC) and plus disease ( Fig 2 DeF) demonstrate this
approximate ﬁeld of view. The terms preplus and plus
should continue to be used,17but the committee emphasizes
that these terms represent a continuous spectrum of retinalvascular changes ( Table 1 ).Figure 3 demonstrates gradings
of this spectrum by members of the Committee. Although
gradings along this spectrum of plus and preplus diseasemay vary among observers,
18e20better agreement exists at
the normal and severe ends.21Importantly, in clinical
practice, assessment of disease severity may consider otherfactors, including clinical and demographic risk factors,examination method (e.g., digital retinal imaging vs.
indirect ophthalmoscopy, lens power), zone of pathologic
featured, and rate of progression.
22
Stage of Acute Disease (Stages 1 e3)
In the developing premature infant, the retina is vascularized
incompletely ( Fig 4 ). When no ROP lesion is present, the
Committee suggests using the term incomplete
vascularization , accompanied by the zone of vascularization
(e.g., “incomplete vascularization into zone II ”), rather than
using terms such as no ROP orimmature retina .W h e na c u t e
ROP vascular features develop at the junction of
vascularized and avascular retina, the term stage is used to
describe the appearance. If more than 1 ROP stage is present
in the same eye, the eye is classi ﬁed by the most severe stage.
Figure 1. Schema of right eye (RE) and left eye (LE) showing zone borders and clock hour sectors used to describe the location of vascularization and extent
of retinopathy. Solid circles represent borders of zones I through III, and dotted circles represent borders of posterior zone II (2 disc diameters be yond zone I).
A hypothetical example of examination ﬁndings is shown in LE, representing approximately 3 clock hours of stage 1 disease in zone II (note single line on
drawing to document presence of stage 1 disease).Chiang et al/C15ICROP, 3rd Edition
3

--- Page 4 ---
Stage 1: Demarcation Line
The demarcation line is a thin structure at the
vascular eavascular juncture ( Figs 5 A, B and 6A), which is
relatively ﬂat and white, lies within the plane of the retina,
and may be associated with abnormal branching of vesselsposterior to the line. Dilatation and tortuosity of peripheral
retinal vessels at the vascular eavascular juncture alone are
insufﬁcient for diagnosis of stage 1 disease.
Stage 2: Ridge
The hallmark of stage 2 ROP is a ridge with width and
height that evolve from the demarcation line ( Figs 5 CeD,
Fa n d Fig 6 B). The ridge may vary in height and its colormay appear to range from white to pink. Small isolated
tufts of neovascular tissue lying on the surface of the
retina, commonly called popcorn , can be seen posterior
to the ridge ( Fig 5 D, F) but do not constitute stage 3
disease.23,24
Stage 3: Extraretinal Neovascular Proliferation
In stage 3 ROP, extraretinal neovascular proliferation ex-
tends from the ridge into the vitreous ( Figs 5 E, F and 6C)
and is continuous with the posterior aspect of the ridge,
causing a ragged appearance as proliferation becomes
more extensive. Seemingly ﬂat-appearing extraretinal
neovascularization can occur in eyes with zone I or posterior
zone II disease, in the absence of an obvious ridge or
Figure 2. Wide-angle fundus photographs demonstrating examples of plus disease and preplus disease. Note varying levels of vascular abnormality, which are
assessed in the central retina within the region of zone I. A, Mild preplus disease, with more arterial tortuosity and venous dilation than normal. B, Preplus
disease, with notable arterial tortuosity but minimal venous dilation. C, Preplus disease, with moderate arterial tortuosity and venous dilation, but considered
by most committee members to be insuf ﬁcient for plus disease. D, Plus disease with notable venous dilation and arterial tortuosity. Note that plus disease is
out of proportion to visible peripheral ﬁndings, suggestive of ﬂat neovascularization (stage 3; white arrows). E, Severe plus disease, with dilation and
tortuosity of both arteries and veins. F, Severe plus disease. Note presence of ill-de ﬁned posterior ﬂat stage 3 (arrows), which, combined with severe plus
disease, is typical of aggressive retinopathy of prematurity.Ophthalmology Volume -, Number -, Month 2021
4

--- Page 5 ---
demarcation line, and is also considered stage 3 disease.
Varying degrees of extraretinal neovascular tissue may be
associated with stage 3 disease ( Figs 5 E, F and 6C).Aggressive Retinopathy of Prematurity
Aggressive-posterior RO Pw a sa d d e dt ot h eI C R O Pi n
2005 to describe a severe, rapidly progressive form ofROP located in zone I or posterior zone II.5Previously
known as rush disease , it may have been the ﬂorid acute
ROP seen in the 1940s.1Aggressive-posterior ROP as
originally described typicall y affected the smallest pre-
mature infants.5,25However, aggressive ROP is
increasingly recognized also to occur in larger preterm
infants and beyond the posterior retina, particularly inregions of the world with limited resources.26Therefore,
because the key diagnostic features of this phenotype are
the tempo of disease and appearance of vascularabnormalities, but not location of disease, the Committee
recommends use of the new term aggressive retinopathy
of prematurity (A-ROP) to replace aggressive-posterior
ROP ( Table 1 ).
The hallmark of A-ROP is rapid development of
pathologic neovascularization and severe plus diseasewithout progression being o bserved through the typical
stages of ROP. In early A-ROP, the retina may exhibit
capillary abnormalities posterior to the original border of
vascularized retina, such as arteriovenous shuntingresembling dilated vascular loops surrounding areas of
vascular injury ( Fig 7 A ) .I ns o m ec a s e s ,t h i sc a nb e
extreme with apparent loss of almost the entire
Figure 3. Continuous spectrum of vascular severity in retinopathy of prematurity from normal to plus disease. All 34 members of this committee graded 30
images as normal, preplus, or plus. Experts ’opinions varied as to the level of disease severity that constitutes preplus and plus disease. A, Six representative
images are displayed in which the color scale on top re ﬂects the average grading of committee members (from green [normal] to red [plus disease]) and
demonstrates that vascular severity presents on a continuum. B, Nine representative segmented images are displayed in which the color scale represents
mean vascular severity grading by committee members for each image (from green [normal] to red [plus disease]) and demonstrates that vascular severi ty
presents on a continuum.
Figure 4. Wide-angle fundus photograph demonstrating incomplete vascu-
larization into zone II in the right eye of a premature infant at risk for reti-nopathy of prematurity. Note progressive tapering and termination of retinal
vascular arcades (white arrows). Permission to reproduce previously published
images from Arch Ophthalmol 2005;123:991-999.Chiang et al/C15ICROP, 3rd Edition
5

--- Page 6 ---
vascularized retina ( Fig 7 ). Eyes in which A-ROP develop
with more posterior disease may have thin vessels withinzone I early in the disease co urse. Eyes with A-ROP often
demonstrate a form of stage 3 disease that may appear as
deceptively featureles sn e t w o r k so fs o - c a l l e d ﬂat neo-
vascularization ( Fig 7 B, C), which can be dif ﬁcult to
visualize using a 28-D lens on ophthalmoscopy, but the
use of greater magni ﬁcation (e.g., 20-D lens) or ﬂuores-
cein angiography may be helpful. Of note, extraretinalneovascularization as seen in classic stage 3 disease can
also be seen in eyes with A-ROP ( Fig 7 C).
27Retinal Detachment (Stages 4 and 5)
Acute disease and its regression are not always demarcated
clearly. This is particularly apparent in retinal detachment,
where both may occur simultaneously.
Stage 4: Partial Retinal Detachment
Stage 4 describes partial retinal detachment, which either
spares (stage 4A; Fig 8 A, B) or involves (stage 4B; Fig 8 C,
E) the fovea. Clinical features suggesting retinal
Figure 5. Wide-angle fundus photographs demonstrating examples of acute retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) stages 1 through 3. A, Stage 1 demarcation
line at the border between vascular and avascular retina (white arrows). B, Stage 1 demarcation line (white arrows) and associated notch (black arrowheads)
between vascular arcades that would be considered zone I secondary to notch. Note preplus disease with mild retinal vascular tortuosity and dilation .
C, Stage 2 ridge, which is raised (white arrows) and thicker than stage 1. D, Stage 2 ridge. Note the so-called popcorn lesions posterior to the ridge (arrow)
and preplus disease with mild vascular tortuosity and dilation. E, Stage 3 disease with extraretinal neovascularization (white arrows). Note plus d isease with
vascular tortuosity and dilation. F, Eye with both stage 2 (black arrowheads) and stage 3 (white arrowheads) disease and associated popcorn (white arrows).
Note plus disease with vascular tortuosity and dilation. Figs 5E and 5F: Permission to reproduce previously published images from Arch
Ophthalmol 2005;123:991-999.Ophthalmology Volume -, Number -, Month 2021
6

--- Page 7 ---
detachment include loss of ﬁne detail of choroidal
vasculature or of granular pigment epithelium, a ground-
glass appearance relative to adjacent attached retina, or
both. Macular ectopia and straightening of arcade vesselsare signs of peripheral tractio n. Subtle foveal involvementmay be discerned most effectively using OCT imaging
(Fig 9 ). Stage 4 ROP may be exudative or tractional, occur
in treated or untreated eyes, and vary in appearance
depending on the tractional vectors and presence ofexudation.
28,29
Figure 6. OCT images demonstrating examples of retinopathy of prematurity stages 1 through 3. OCT cross-sectional B-scans (left side) are extracted from
the raster scans that make up the OCT volume, at the location of the green-line (right side). The en face OCT images (right side) are summed from the
OCT volume, and blood in retinal vessels casts a shadow across the underlying retina and choroid. A, Stage 1 demarcation line (white arrows) on cross-
sectional B-scan OCT image (left side) align with the retinal vascular eavascular junction (right side; note that the vascular retina is to the left in all images).
B, Stage 2 ridge (white arrows) on cross-sectional B-scan OCT image (left side) at a site of focal thickening and bulge of inner retinal layers aligns wit h the
en face (right side) wider dark border of the vascular eavascular junction. C, Stage 3 extraretinal neovascular proliferation at (white arrows) and posterior to
(arrowheads) the vascular eavascular junction on cross-sectional B-scan OCT image (left side) and on en face view (right side). Note that blood in the
extraretinal vessels also casts a shadow across the underlying retina and choroid.Chiang et al/C15ICROP, 3rd Edition
7

--- Page 8 ---
Exudative stage 4 detachments occur most commonly
within days after laser trea tment. They are typically
convex, sometimes localized, a nd self-limited. Tractional
detachments are associated with progressive ﬁbrovascular
organization and vitreous haze and may be associated with
lipid or subretinal hemorrhage or both ( Fig 8 D).
Distinction by clinical examin ation between retinoschisis
and detachment can be dif ﬁcult. Eyes with A-ROP can
demonstrate a unique posterior so-called volcano trac-tional detachment28generally involving the fovea, in
which the peripheral retina remains attached ( Fig 8 E).
Although the clinical appearance is reminiscent of astage 5 funnel-shaped detachment, these are morecorrectly considered stage 4B disease because the treatedperipheral retina remains attached and the detachment
therefore is not total.
Stage 5: Total Retinal Detachment
Total retinal detachment is designated as stage 5 ( Fig 10 )
and currently classi ﬁed by con ﬁguration of the funnel:
open-open (open anterior and posteriorly), open-closed
(open anteriorly and closed posteriorly), closed-open(closed anteriorly and open posteriorly), or closed-closed
(closed anteriorly and posteriorly). When ﬁbrosis pre-
cludes visualization of the posterior pole, the extent ofdetachment must be examined by B-scan ultrasonography.
To permit classi ﬁcation of stage 5 by bedside examination,
Figure 7. Images depicting aggressive retinopathy of prematurity (A-ROP). A, Fundus photograph showing aggressive ROP (A-ROP) with severe vaso-
constriction, capillary nonperfusion, nonphysiologic dilated vascular loops, and arteriovenous shunts and plus disease in zone I. B, Fundus photograph
showing A-ROP with border between vascular and avascular retina in zone I, dilated vascular loops (white arrows), diffuse ﬂat extraretinal neo-
vascularization most prominent superotemporally, and severe plus disease. Note the absence of a typical stage 3 lesion. C, Fundus photograph showing A-
ROP in zone I with severe plus disease, ﬂat extraretinal neovascularization with ﬁbrosis, and early contraction superiorly (white arrowheads) and intraretinal
and vitreous hemorrhage superotemporally. D,E, Wide-angle fundus photographs (left sides) demonstrating A-ROP with ill-de ﬁned junction between
vascular and avascular retina in zone I (white arrows) and severe plus disease, and ﬂuorescein angiography (right sides) demonstrating signi ﬁcant vaso-
obliteration with capillary nonperfusion. Note that no typical ROP lesions appear and vasoattenuated areas appear posterior to the ridge.Ophthalmology Volume -, Number -, Month 2021
8

--- Page 9 ---
the Committee now recommends that total detachment be
subcategorized into 3 con ﬁgurations:30e32stage 5A, in
which the optic disc is visible by ophthalmoscopy ( Fig 10 A,
suggesting open-funnel detachment); stage 5B, in which the
optic disc is not visible secondary to retrolental ﬁbrovas-
cular tissue or closed-funnel detachment ( Fig 10 B, C); and
stage 5C, in which ﬁndings of stage 5B are accompanied
by anterior segment abnormalities (e.g., anterior lens
displacement, marked anterior chamber shallowing,iridocapsular adhesions, capsule-endothelial adhesion with
central corneal opaci ﬁcation, or a combination thereof;
Fig 10 D, suggesting a closed-funnel con ﬁguration).4,33
Additional descriptors of funnel con ﬁguration (e.g., open-
closed) may be applied if clinically useful.Extent
Extent of disease is classi ﬁed using 30/C14sectors with
boundaries along clock-hour positions ( Fig 1 ).
Regression, Reactivation, and Long-Term
Sequelae
To date, ROP classi ﬁcation has focused on acute disease,
with less attention to regression.4,5,33The introduction of
anti-VEGF agents has presented new challenges. The clin-ical features and time course of regression after anti-VEGF
treatment of ROP differ compared with those of laser-treated
Figure 8. Wide-angle fundus photographs demonstrating examples of retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) stage 4. A, Stage 4A ROP in the temporal retina.
Traction on extraretinal neovascularization leads to retinal elevation (white dots), which may be recognized during ophthalmoscopy by subtle chan ge in
brightness and loss of visible retinal pigment epithelium granularity and choriocapillaris detail. Note that the approximate foveal center (aster isk) is not elevated
and the extraretinal neovascularization (white arrows) may be signi ﬁcantly more peripheral than the posterior extent of the detachment. B, Stage 4A ROP with
360/C14tractional retinal detachment in the area of the peripheral ridge. C, Stage 4B detachment involving the macula. Note straightening of the arcuate vessels
and dragged of the optic disc appearance. D, Stage 4B detachment with associated subretinal hemorrhage and lipid exudation into the macula. E, Volcano-
shaped stage 4B ROP. In eyes with posterior ROP, contraction of pathologic neovascularization can result in detachment of vascularized retina into avolcano-shaped con ﬁguration. Fig 8C : Permission to reproduce previously published images from Areh Ophthalmol 2005;123:991-999.Chiang et al/C15ICROP, 3rd Edition
9

--- Page 10 ---
eyes. When describing later phases of ROP, the Committee
recommends use of 2 terms ( Table 1 ): (1) regression , which
refers to disease involution and resolution; and (2)
reactivation , which refers to recurrence of acute phase
features. Regression may be complete or incomplete,
including persistence of retinal abnormalities. Regression
and reactivation should not be regarded as either thereverse or the repetition of acute ROP.
Regression
Patterns of acute-phase regression in ROP differ between
spontaneous regression and t hose occurring after treat-
ment. The Committee highlights features of regressionrelated to vasculature as well as peripheral ROP ﬁndings in
Figure 11 .
Theﬁrst visible signs of regression are typically vascular
and tend to occur more rapidly after anti-VEGF therapy (as
early as 1 e3 days)
34than after laser photocoagulation(approximately 7 e14 days) or during spontaneous
regression.33,35,36These signs include decreased plus
disease, where components of vascular dilation and
tortuosity may become uncoupled (e.g., after anti-VEGFinjection, reduced vessel dilatation can occur before
reduced tortuosity, which may or may not occur), and
vascularization into peripheral avascular retina, which canoccur spontaneously or after anti-VEGF treatment. Other
clinical signs of regression include involution of tunica
vasculosa lentis, better pupillary dilation, greater mediaclarity, and resolution of intraretinal hemorrhages.
Regression of the ROP lesion is characterized by thin-
ning and whitening of neovascular tissue. After spontaneous
or treatment-induced regression, vascularization into theperipheral avascular retina can be complete or incomplete,
the latter being termed persistent avascular retina (PAR;
Fig 12 ). Persistent avascular retina may occur in either the
peripheral or posterior retina. Compared with peripheral
PAR after spontaneous regression, PAR after treatment
Figure 9. OCT images demonstrating examples of stage 4 disease. OCT cross-sectional B-scans (left side) are extracted from the raster of scans that make up
the OCT volumes, viewed as summed en face images (middle) with corresponding color photographs (right side). Note that in the color photographs, it is
difﬁcult to discern the extent of retinal detachment, especially foveal involvement. In the en face OCT images and color photographs, the location of the
fovea (asterisk) and margin of detachment (white dots) are determined from OCT B-scans. Blood in retinal vessels casts a shadow across the underlying
retina and choroid in the en face views. A, Stage 4A retinal detachment. On the en face OCT image (middle), the yellow line demonstrates the location of
the B-scan superior to the foveal center (upper left side, yellow box) and the green line demonstrates the location of the B-scan through the foveal cen ter
(bottom left side, green box). Note the attached retina on B-scan at the foveal center (asterisk), along with intraretinal exudates (hyperre ﬂective dots),
peripheral retinal detachment, and retinoschisis. B, Stage 4B retinal detachment. Note detachment of the retina at the foveal center (asterisks), which was
very dif ﬁcult to appreciate on ophthalmoscopic examination.Ophthalmology Volume -, Number -, Month 2021
10

--- Page 11 ---
with anti-VEGF agents seems to occur with greater fre-
quency and involve a larger retinal area.37Persistent
avascular retina should be described by its location (e.g.,posterior zone II) and extent (e.g., nasal).
Reactivation
Reactivation is seen more frequently after anti-VEGF
treatment than after spontaneous regression and rarely ifever occurs after complete laser photocoagulation. Reac-
tivation may occur after incomplete or complete regressionof the original ROP lesion. Although the maximum interval
until reactivation after anti-VEGF injection is unknown,current evidence suggests it most commonly occurs between37 and 60 weeks ’postmenstrual age. However, this may be
affected by choice and dosage of anti-VEGF agent and may
occur signi ﬁcantly later, especially if reinjections are
performed.
38,39
Signs of reactivation range from development of a new
self-limiting demarcation line to reactivated stage 3 withplus disease. The Committee highlights features of disease
reactivation related to vasculature and ROP lesions in
Figure 10. Images demonstrating examples of stage 5 retinopathy of prematurity (ROP). A, Wide-angle fundus photograph showing stage 5A ROP,
characterized by a total retinal detachment with visible optic disc. Note the open-funnel con ﬁguration. B, Wide-angle fundus photograph showing stage 5B
ROP, with no view of the optic disc because of ﬁbrovascular tissue. C, External photograph of the normal anterior segment in stage 5B ROP (left side), with
no view of the optic disc or retina secondary to retrolental ﬁbrovascular tissue. B-scan ultrasonography (right side) reveals total retinal detachment with a
posteriorly closed funnel con ﬁguration. D, External photograph showing anterior segment characteristic of stage 5C ROP with anterior lens displacement,
marked anterior chamber shallowing, central iridocapsular endothelial adhesion, and central corneal opaci ﬁcation (asterisk) that prevent view of a closed-
funnel retinal detachment. Fig 10B: Permission to reproduce previously published images from Arch Ophthalmol 2005;123:991-999.Chiang et al/C15ICROP, 3rd Edition
11

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 13 and notes that reactivation may not progress
through the normal sequence of stages of acute-phasedisease.
Vascular changes in ROP reactivation include recurrent
vascular dilation, tortuosity, or both, similar to acute-phasepreplus or plus disease. Extraretinal new vessels can occur
and may be relatively delicate compared with those of acute
ROP, making them dif ﬁcult to visualize. Hemorrhages can
occur around fronds of extraretinal vessels. Alternatively,
extraretinal vessels may appear as a ﬁbrovascular ridge,
which may progress to ﬁbrosis, contraction, and tractional
detachment.
28,29,40Documentation of reactivation should specify presence
and location(s) of new ROP features, noted by zone andstage using the modi ﬁerreactivated . For example, presence
of a demarcation line during reactivation would be noted as
“reactivated stage 1. ”Reactivation typically occurs at the
site of the original ridge, at the new leading edge of intra-
retinal vascular growth, or both but also may occur else-
where within the vascularized retina. If multiple ridges arepresent, the modi ﬁerreactivated is applied to the more
anterior ridge, which is typically more active. Signs of
reactivation may be relatively subtle ( Fig 13 G). Reactivation
with progression to stages 4 and 5 ROP is associated with
Figure 11. Wide-angle fundus photographs demonstrating examples of retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) regression. A, Regression after laser treatment. Left
image obtained before treatment showing stage 3 ROP with plus disease. Middle image obtained 1 week after treatment showing that stage 3 ROP is thinner and
whiter. Right image obtained 1 month after treatment showing disease regression. B, Regression of plus disease after anti evascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) injection for aggressive ROP. Left image obtained before treatment showing plus disease and ﬂat neovascularization (stage 3 ROP). Right image
obtained 2 weeks after treatment showing improvement in plus disease with no visible ROP lesion. C, Regression after anti-VEGF injection. Left image obtained
before treatment. Right image obtained 4 weeks after treatment showing absence of stage 3 ROP and improvement in plus disease, with vascularization i nto
peripheral avascular retina. Note the circumferential anastomosis in the area of original stage 3, along with reactivated stage 1 more anteriorly.Ophthalmology Volume -, Number -, Month 2021
12

--- Page 13 ---
vitreous condensation, haze, ﬁbrotic contraction, retinal
breaks, or a combination thereof.4,5,28,29,33,40
Long-Term Sequelae
Patients with a history of premature birth, even without a
history of ROP, exhibit a spectrum of ocular abnormalitiesthat may lead to permanent sequelae ( Fig 12 ), as outlined
below.4,33,41
/C15Late tractional, rhegmatogenous, or, rarely, exudative
retinal detachments ( Fig 12 D).42Retinal detachment
occurring in the absence of signs of ROP activityshould not be designated as being the result of
reactivation but rather as a sequela.43/C15Retinoschisis from chronic traction of involuted stage
3 may progress without retinal detachment into the
macula and may threaten visual ﬁeld and visual
acuity.
/C15Persistent avascular retina ( Fig 12 AeC). Avascular
retina is prone to retinal thinning, holes, and lattice-
like changes and may be associated with retinaldetachments later in life.42e45
/C15Macular anomalies including smaller foveal avascular
zone46e48and blunting or absence of the foveal
depression ( Fig 12 E). These may be related to the
degree of acute-phase ROP and may be more
apparent with ﬂuorescein angiography or OCT
imaging.24,37
Figure 12. Examples of persistent avascular retina (PAR) and long-term sequelae of retinopathy of prematurity (ROP). A, Combined tractional and
exudative detachment in an 18-year-old with a history of untreated ROP whose fellow eye was phthisical as a result of ROP. B, Ultra-wide ﬁeldﬂuorescein
angiogram (FA) demonstrating PAR (asterisks) in a 7-year-old with a history of spontaneously regressed ROP. Note the abnormal vascular con ﬁguration,
particularly inferotemporally (circle). C, Ultra-wide ﬁeld FA from a 7-year-old with spontaneously regressed ROP but with PAR and leakage in incompletely
regressed stage 3 disease inferotemporally (asterisks). D, Ultra-wide ﬁeld fundus image (left side) displaying an incompletely regressed ridge (white arrow-
heads) with PAR (asterisks) in a 15-year-old with a history of extreme prematurity and no prior ROP treatment. Ultra-wide ﬁeld fundus image obtained 2
years later (right side) when the patient demonstrated a macula-involving rhegmatogenous retinal detachment. The fellow eye had a similar appearan ce and
disease course. E, OCT angiography image of an incompletely developed foveal contour (left) and poorly de ﬁned foveal avascular zone (right) in a 7-year-old
with history of type 1 ROP treated with laser therapy.Chiang et al/C15ICROP, 3rd Edition
13

--- Page 14 ---
/C15Retinal vascular changes. These may include persistent
tortuosity, straightening of the vascular arcades withmacular dragging, and falciform retinal fold.
Abnormal nondichotomous retinal vessel branching,
circumferential interconnecting vascular arcades, andtelangiectatic vessels occur frequently. Vitreous hem-
orrhage may occur.
/C15Glaucoma. Eyes with history of ROP can demon-
strate secondary angle-closure glaucoma later in
life.49,50
Figure 13. Examples of retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) reactivation. A, Image obtained at 38 weeks ’postmenstrual age (PMA) after intravitreal
antievascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) injection at 32 weeks ’PMA with vascularization into the peripheral avascular retina. Demarcation line
(arrow) at the leading edge is reactivated stage 1 ROP. B, Image showing a left eye at 100 weeks ’PMA after treatment with intravitreal anti-VEGF injection
at 38 weeks ’PMA. Vascularization into the peripheral avascular retina is present. Often notable vascular abnormalities are present at the site of the original
ridge and, in some cases, residual ﬁbrosis (asterisk), which is not indicative of reactivation unless accompanied by increasing vascular activity. C, Image
showing vascularization into the peripheral avascular retina with reactivated stage 1 disease (arrow) at 68 weeks ’PMA, after treatment with intravitreal anti-
VEGF injection at 37 weeks ’PMA. Note multiple circumferential vascular loops at the site of the original ridge (asterisk). D, Image showing reactivation in
a right eye at 67 weeks ’PMA that had undergone intravitreal anti-VEGF injection at 33 weeks ’and again at 52 weeks ’PMA. Reactivated stage 3 disease
(asterisk) is present posterior to the leading edge of vascularization (arrow). E, Image showing a left eye with reactivated stage 3 ROP at the leading edge
(arrow) at 50 weeks ’PMA, after intravitreal anti-VEGF injection at 36 weeks ’PMA. Vascularization into the peripheral avascular retina has occurred
between the original ridge (asterisks) and anterior reactivation. F, Fluorescein angiogram obtained at 45 weeks ’PMA of a left eye that had received an
intravitreal anti-VEGF injection at 34 weeks ’PMA. Leakage is present both at sites of leading edge reactivation (arrow) and at the original border (asterisk).
G, Image showing right eye with zone I disease treated with intravitreal anti-VEGF injection at 34 weeks ’PMA (left side, arrow) and that appeared regressed
on clinical examination at 38 weeks ’PMA (middle image, arrow). At 51 weeks ’PMA, the eye demonstrated reactivated stage 3 ROP at the same site (right
side, arrow) without evidence of vascularization into peripheral avascular retina.Ophthalmology Volume -, Number -, Month 2021
14

--- Page 15 ---
Conclusions
Understanding of disease pathophysiologic features and
clinical management of ROP have evolved with advances
in science, technology, and the art of medicine. Since the
ICROP publication in 2005, some speci ﬁc advances have
involved neonatal care, anti-VEGF therapy,
ophthalmic imaging, machine l earning, and pediatric vit-
reoretinal surgery. This article updates ROP classi ﬁcation
in response to those advances by integrating review of
evidence-based literature with expert consensus
opinion. Table 1 summarizes how the ICROP3 maintains
many existing classi ﬁcation metrics, while re ﬁning and
adding others such as revised classi ﬁcation metrics
(e.g., posterior zone II, notch, subcategorization ofstage 5, and recognition of a continuous spectrum ofvascular abnormality while maintaining the terms
preplus disease and plus disease ), the de ﬁnition of
A-ROP to replace aggressive-posterior ROP, andthe de ﬁnition of nomenclature representing ROP regres-
sion and reactivation. These principles will provide a
foundation for improving research and clinical care in thefuture.Nevertheless, the ICROP3 simply marks a point in the
journey toward improving ROP care and outcomes. Wehope this will lead to increased understanding of acute-
phase ROP, its regression, and its reactivation. Areas in
need of additional research include methods for quantifyingvascular changes, including rate of disease progression;characterizing clinical ﬁndings using other imaging methods
(e.g., ﬂuorescein angiography, OCT); understanding long-
term risks of PAR; and elucidating signs and timing ofROP reactivation. Further collaboration with other care-
givers and investigators will improve the quality and stan-
dardization of ROP care worldwide.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Lauren Kalinoski, MS, CMI (University of Il-
linois at Chicago) for assistance with artwork; Jimmy Chen, BA
(Oregon Health & Science University) and Shwetha Mangalesh,MBBS (Duke University) for assistance with images; and FarukOrge, MD (Case Western Reserve University), Sonal Farzavandi,
FRCS(Edin) (Singapore National Eye Centre), and Derek
Sprunger, MD (Indiana University School of Medicine) for supportof this project through the International Pediatric Ophthalmology
& Strabismus Council.
Footnotes and Disclosures
Originally received: March 29, 2021.
Final revision: May 27, 2021.
Accepted: May 28, 2021.Available online:
--- . Manuscript no. D-21-00645.
1National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
2Division of Ophthalmology, Children ’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Scheie
Eye Institute, Raymond and Ruth Perelman School of Medicine at the
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
3Department of Optometry and Visual Science, University of London,
London, United Kingdom.
4Department of Ophthalmology, Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health &
Science University, Portland, Oregon.
5Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Illinois Eye and Ear
Inﬁrmary, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
6Department of Ophthalmology, Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, University
of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida.
7Retina Consultants, Ltd., Des Plaines, Illinois.
8Department of Ophthalmology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
9Associated Retinal Consultants, PC, Royal Oak, Michigan, and Depart-
ment of Ophthalmology, Oakland University, William Beaumont HospitalSchool of Medicine, Auburn Hills, Michigan.
10Department of Ophthalmology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Bei-
jing, China.
11Ophthalmology Department, Queensland Children ’s Hospital, Brisbane,
Australia.
12Calgary Retina Consultants, Calgary, Canada.
13Department of Ophthalmology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
United Kingdom.
14Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Institute, San Francisco, California.
15Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, John A. Moran Eye
Center, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
16Department Neuroscience/Ophthalmology, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden.17Department of Ophthalmology, Kindai University, Osakasayama, Japan.
18Department of Ophthalmology, KYDOFT Foundation, Santiago, Chile.
19A. Gemelli Foundation IRCSS, Department of Ageing and Neuroscience,
Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.
20Department of Ophthalmology, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Gies-
sen, Germany.
21Department of Ophthalmology, Universitaetsklinikum Bonn, Bonn,
Germany.
22Retina Department, Asociación para Evitar la Ceguera en México,
Mexico City, Mexico.
23Department of Ophthalmology, School of Medicine, Gazi University,
Ankara, Turkey.
24Department of Ophthalmology, University of Ilorin, Ilorin, Nigeria.
25Ross Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, University at Buffalo,
Buffalo, New York.
26Department of Pediatric Retina and Ocular Oncology, Aravind Eye
Hospital, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India.
27Department of Ophthalmology, University Medicine Greifswald,
Greifswald, Germany.
28Department of Ophthalmology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina.
29Department of Pediatric Retina, Narayana Nethralaya Eye Institute,
Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
30Department of Ophthalmology, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban,
South Africa.
31Department of Ophthalmology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana.
32Department of Ophthalmology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou,
Taoyuan, Taiwan, and Chang Gung University, College of Medicine,
Taoyuan, Taiwan.
33Department of Ophthalmology, Xinhua Hospital af ﬁliated to Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.Chiang et al/C15ICROP, 3rd Edition
15

--- Page 16 ---
34Clinical Research Unit, Fernandes Figueira Institute, FIOCRUZ, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.
Disclosure(s):
Michael Chiang, an editorial board member of this journal, was recused
from the peer-review process of this article and had no access to informa-tion regarding its peer-review.
All authors have completed and submitted the ICMJE disclosures form.The author(s) have made the following disclosure(s): M.F.C.: Consultant e
Novartis; Financial support eGenentech; Equity owner eInTeleretina
A.R.F.: Consultant eNovartis, Bayer
R.V.P.C.: Scienti ﬁc Advisory Board ePhoenix Technology; Consultant e
Alcon, Novartis
J.P.C.: Financial support eGenentech
A.C.: Equity owner ePhoenix Technology Group, LLC, Retinal Solutions,
LLC; Founder eRetinal Solutions, LLC; Financial support eAURA
Biosciences; Bayer; Genentech; Ionis Pharmaceuticals; Novartis; Regen-eron Pharmaceuticals
B.W.F.: Consultant eNovartis
M.E.H.: Consultant eRegeneron
B.L.: Consultant eNovartis, Janssen
D.L.: Consultant eNovartis, Bayer
S¸.Ö.: Consultant eNovartis, Bayer, Allergan
A.S.: Consultant eNovartis, Bayer; Financial support eNovartis
C.A.T.: Royalties eAlcon; Founder and Equity owner eTheia Imaging,
LLC
W.-C.W.: Consultant eNovartis, Bayer, Allergan
All authors are members of the International Committee for the Classi ﬁ-
cation of Retinopathy of Prematurity.
Michael F. Chiang had full access to all the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data
analysis.
Supported by the Knights Templar Eye Foundation; the Illinois Eye and Ear
Inﬁrmary at the University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois; National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland (grant nos.: R01EY19474 [J.P.C.],
K12EY027720 [J.P.C.], R01EY017011 [M.E.H.], F01EY01730 [M.E.H.],
EY014800 [M.E.H.], R01EY025009 [C.A.T.], U01EY028079 [C.A.T.],P30EY005722 [C.A.T.], P30EY001792, and P30EY10572); the NationalScience Foundation (SCH-1622679 [J.P.C.]); Research to Prevent Blind-
ness, Inc., New York, New York (unrestricted departmental funding, Career
Development Award [J.P.C.], and Stein Award [C.A.T.]); and the Calvin S.and JeNeal N. Hatch Presidential Endowed Chair in Ophthalmology andVisual Sciences (M.E.H.). The sponsor or funding organization had no role
in the design or conduct of this research.Presented in part at: American Academy of Ophthalmology Annual
Meeting, November 2020 (virtual); and the American Association for Pe-
diatric Ophthalmology & Strabismus Annual Meeting, April 2021 (virtual).
HUMAN SUBJECTS: No human subjects were included in this study. The
requirement for informed consent was waived because of the retrospectivenature of the study. All research adhered to the tenets of the Declaration ofHelsinki.
No animal subjects were included in this study.
Author Contributions:Conception and design: Chiang, Quinn, Fielder, Ostmo, Chan, Berrocal,
Binenbaum, Blair, Campbell, Capone, Chen, Dai, Ells, Fleck, Good,Hartnett, Holmstrom, Kusaka, Kychenthal, Lepore, Lorenz, Martinez-
Castellanos, Özdek, Ademola-Popoola, Reynolds, Shah, Shapiro, Stahl,
Toth, Vinekar, Visser, Wallace, Wu, Zhao, Zin
Analysis and interpretation: Chiang, Quinn, Fielder, Ostmo, Chan, Berro-
cal, Binenbaum, Blair, Campbell, Capone, Chen, Dai, Ells, Fleck, Good,
Hartnett, Holmstrom, Kusaka, Kychenthal, Lepore, Lorenz, Martinez-
Castellanos, Özdek, Ademola-Popoola, Reynolds, Shah, Shapiro, Stahl,Toth, Vinekar, Visser, Wallace, Wu, Zhao, Zin
Data collection: Chiang, Quinn, Fielder, Ostmo, Chan, Berrocal, Binen-
baum, Blair, Campbell, Capone, Chen, Dai, Ells, Fleck, Good, Hartnett,
Holmstrom, Kusaka, Kychenthal, Lepore, Lorenz, Martinez-Castellanos,Özdek, Ademola-Popoola, Reynolds, Shah, Shapiro, Stahl, Toth, Vinekar,Visser, Wallace, Wu, Zhao, Zin
Obtained funding: Chan, Chiang, Quinn, Fielder, Ostmo, Campbell, Hart-
nett, Toth; Study was performed as part of the authors
’regular employment
duties. No additional funding was provided.
Overall responsibility: Chiang, Quinn, Fielder, Ostmo, Chan, Berrocal,
Binenbaum, Blair, Campbell, Capone, Chen, Dai, Ells, Fleck, Good,
Hartnett, Holmstrom, Kusaka, Kychenthal, Lepore, Lorenz, Martinez-
Castellanos, Özdek, Ademola-Popoola, Reynolds, Shah, Shapiro, Stahl,Toth, Vinekar, Visser, Wallace, Wu, Zhao, Zin
Abbreviations and Acronyms:
A-ROP ¼aggressive retinopathy of prematurity; D¼diopter;
ICROP ¼International Classi ﬁcation of Retinopathy of Prematurity;
ICROP3 ¼International Classi ﬁcation of Retinopathy of Prematurity,
Third Edition; PAR ¼persistent avascular retina; ROP ¼retinopathy of
prematurity; VEGF ¼vascular endothelial growth factor.
Keywords:
Neonatology, Pediatric ophthalmology, Prematurity, Retina, Retinopathy ofprematurity.
Correspondence:
Michael F. Chiang, MD, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Building 31, Room 6A03, 31 Center Drive, MSC 2510, Bethesda,MD 20892. E-mail: michael.chiang@nih.gov.
References
1.Reese AB, King MJ, Owens WC. Classi ﬁcation of retrolental
ﬁbroplasia. Am J Ophthalmol . 1953;36(10):1333 e1335 .
2.The Committee for the Classi ﬁcation of Retinopathy of Pre-
maturity. An international classi ﬁcation of retinopathy of
prematurity. Arch Ophthalmol . 1984;102(8):1130 e1134 .
3.Cryotherapy for Retinopathy of Prematurity Cooperative
Group. Multicenter trial of cryotherapy for retinopathy ofprematurity. Preliminary results. Arch Ophthalmol .
1988;106(4):471 e479.
4.International Classi ﬁcation of Retinopathy of Prematurity
Committee for Classi ﬁcation of Late Stages of ROP. An in-
ternational classi ﬁcation of retinopathy of prematurity: II. The
classi ﬁcation of retinal detachment. Arch Ophthalmol .
1987;105:906 e912.5.Committee for the Classi ﬁcation of Retinopathy of Prematu-
rity. The International Classi ﬁcation of Retinopathy of Pre-
maturity revisited. Arch Ophthalmol . 2005;123(7):991 e999.
6.Mintz-Hittner HA, Kennedy KA, Chuang AZ; BEAT-ROP
Cooperative Group. Ef ﬁcacy of intravitreal bevacizumab for
stage 3 þretinopathy of prematurity. N Engl J Med .
2011;364(7):603 e615.
7.Stahl A, Lepore D, Fielder A, et al. Ranibizumab versus laser
therapy for the treatment of very low birthweight infants with
retinopathy of prematurity (RAINBOW): an open-labelrandomised controlled trial. Lancet . 2019;394(10208):
1551e1559 .
8.Provis JM. Development of the primate retinal vasculature.
Prog Retin Eye Res . 2001;20(6):799 e821.Ophthalmology Volume -, Number -, Month 2021
16

--- Page 17 ---
9.Gallagher K, Moseley MJ, Tandon A, et al. Nasotemporal
asymmetry of retinopathy of prematurity. Arch Ophthalmol .
2003;121(11):1563 e1568 .
10.Isenberg SJ. Macular development in the premature infant. Am
J Ophthalmol . 1986;101(1):74 e80.
11.De Silva DJ, Cocker KD, Lau G, Clay ST, Fielder AR,
Moseley MJ. Optic disk size and optic disk-to-fovea distancein preterm and full-term infants. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci .
2006;47(11):4683 e4686 .
12.Chiang MF, Thyparampil PJ, Rabinowitz D. Interexpert
agreement in the identi ﬁcation of macular location in infants at
risk for retinopathy of prematurity. Arch Ophthalmol .
2010;128(9):1153 e1159 .
13.Quinn GE, Schaffer DB, Johnson L. A revised classi ﬁcation of
retinopathy of prematurity. Am J Ophthalmol . 1982;94(6):
744e749.
14.Capone Jr A, Ells AL, Fielder AR, et al. Standard image of
plus disease in retinopathy of prematurity. Arch Ophthalmol .
2006;124(11):1669 e1670 .
15.Gelman SK, Gelman R, Callahan AB, et al. Plus disease in
retinopathy of prematurity: quantitative analysis of standardpublished photograph. Arch Ophthalmol . 2010;128(9):
1217e1220 .
16.Kim SJ, Campbell JP, Kalpathy-Cramer J, et al. Accuracy and
reliability of eye-based vs quadrant-based diagnosis of plusdisease in retinopathy of prematurity. JAMA Ophthalmol .
2018;136(6):648 e655.
17.Early Treatment for Retinopathy of Prematurity Cooperative
Group. Revised indications for the treatment of retinopathy ofprematurity: results of the early treatment for retinopathy of
prematurity randomized trial. Arch Ophthalmol . 2003;121(12):
1684e1694 .
18.Chiang MF, Jiang L, Gelman R, et al. Interexpert agreement of
plus disease diagnosis in retinopathy of prematurity. Arch
Ophthalmol . 2007;125(7):875 e880.
19.Wallace DK, Quinn GE, Freedman SF, Chiang MF. Agree-
ment among pediatric ophthalmologists in diagnosing plus andpre-plus disease in retinopathy of prematurity. J AAPOS .
2008;12(4):352
e356.
20.Fleck BW, Williams C, Juszczak E, et al. An international
comparison of retinopathy of prematurity grading performance
within the Bene ﬁts of Oxygen Saturation Targeting II trials.
Eye. 2018;32(1):74 e80.
21.Campbell JP, Kalpathy-Cramer J, Erdogmus D, et al. Plus
disease in retinopathy of prematurity: a continuous spectrum of
vascular abnormality as a basis of diagnostic variability.
Ophthalmology . 2016;123(11):2338 e2344 .
22.Gschlieber A, Stifter E, Neumayer T, et al. Effect of pa-
tients ’clinical information on the diagnosis of and decision
to treat retinopathy of prematurity. Retina . 2018;38(11):
2253e2259 .
23.Wallace DK, Kylstra JA, Greenman DB, Freedman SF.
Signi ﬁcance of isolated neovascular tufts ( “popcorn ”)i n
retinopathy of prematurity. J AAPOS . 1998;2(1):52 e56.
24.Lepore D, Molle F, Pagliara MM, et al. Atlas of ﬂuorescein
angiographic ﬁndings in eyes undergoing laser for reti-
nopathy of prematurity. Ophthalmology . 2011;118(1):
168e175.
25.Flynn JT, Chan-Ling T. Retinopathy of prematurity: two
distinct mechanisms that underlie zone 1 and zone 2 disease.
Am J Ophthalmol . 2006;142(1):46 e59.e2 .
26.Shah PK, Narendran V, Saravanan VR, et al. Fulminate reti-
nopathy of prematurity dclinical characteristics and laser
outcome. Indian J Ophthalmol . 2005;53(4):261 e265.27.Sanghi G, Dogra MR, Dogra M, Katoch D, Gupta A. A hybrid
form of retinopathy of prematurity. Br J Ophthalmol .
2012;96(4):519 e522.
28.Hartnett ME, McColm JR. Retinal features predictive of pro-
gressive stage 4 retinopathy of prematurity. Retina .
2004;24(2):237 e241.
29.Kondo H, Arita N, Osato M, et al. Late recurrence of retinal
detachment following successful vitreous surgery for stages
4B and 5 retinopathy of prematurity. Am J Ophthalmol .
2009;147(4):661 e666.e1 .
30.Jabbour NM, Eller AE, Hirose T, et al. Stage 5 retinopathy of
prematurity. Prognostic value of morphologic ﬁndings.
Ophthalmology . 1987;94(12):1640 e1646 .
31.Gadkari SS, Deshpande M, Kulkarni S. Minimally ﬁbrotic
stage 5 ROP: a clinical prognostic factor in eyes undergoingvitrectomy for stage 5 retinopathy of prematurity. Graefes
Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol . 2016;254(7):1303 e1309 .
32.Ozsaygili C, Ozdek S, Ozmen MC, et al. Preoperative
anatomical features associated with improved surgical out-
comes for stage 5 retinopathy of prematurity. Retina .
2021;41(4):718 e725.
33.Coats DK, Miller AM, Hussein MAW, et al. Involution of
retinopathy of prematurity after laser treatment: factors
associated with development of retinal detachment. Am J
Ophthalmol . 2005;140(2):214 e222.
34.Stahl A, Krohne TU, Eter N, et al. Comparing alternative
ranibizumab dosages for safety and ef ﬁcacy in retinopathy of
prematurity: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Pediatr .
2018;172(3):278 e286.
35.Ling CS, Fleck BW, Wright E, et al. Diode laser treatment for
retinopathy of prematurity: structural and functional outcome.
Br J Ophthalmol . 1995;79(7):637 e641.
36.Kwon JY, Ghodasra DH, Karp KA, et al. Retinal vessel
changes after laser treatment for retinopathy of prematurity.
J AAPOS . 2012;16(4):350 e353.
37.Vural A, Ekinci DY, Onur IU, et al. Comparison of ﬂuorescein
angiographic ﬁndings in type 1 and type 2 retinopathy of pre-
maturity with intravitreal bevacizumab monotherapy and
spontaneous regression. Int Ophthalmol . 2019;39(10):
2267e2274 .
38.Mintz-Hittner HA, Geloneck MM, Chuang AZ. Clinical
management of recurrent retinopathy of prematurity after
intravitreal bevacizumab monotherapy. Ophthalmology .
2016;123(9):1845
e1855 .
39.Wallace DK, Dean TW, Hartnett ME, et al. A dosing study of
bevacizumab for retinopathy of prematurity: late recurrences
and additional treatments. Ophthalmology . 2018;125(12):
1961e1966 .
40.Yonekawa Y, Thomas BJ, Thanos A, et al. The cutting edge
of retinopathy of prematurity care: expanding the bound-
aries of diagnosis and treatment. Retina . 2017;37(12):
2208e2225 .
41.Bowl W, Lorenz B, Stieger K, et al. Fundus-controlled dark
adaptometry in young children without and with spontane-
ously regressed retinopathy of prematurity. Transl Vis Sci
Technol . 2019;8(3):62 .
42.Uner OE, Rao P, Hubbard 3rd GB. Reactivation of retinopathy
of prematurity in adults and adolescents. Ophthalmol Retina .
2020;4(7):720 e727.
43.Hamad AE, Moinuddin O, Blair MP, et al. Late-onset retinal
ﬁndings and complications in untreated retinopathy of
prematurity. Ophthalmol Retina . 2020;4(6):602 e612.
44.Garcia Gonzalez JM, Snyder L, Blair M, et al. Prophylactic
peripheral laser and ﬂuorescein angiography afterChiang et al/C15ICROP, 3rd Edition
17

--- Page 18 ---
bevacizumab for retinopathy of prematurity. Retina .
2018;38(4):764 e772.
45.Al-Taie R, Simkin SK, Douçet E, Dai S. Persistent avascular
retina in infants with a history of type 2 retinopathy of pre-
maturity: to treat or not to treat? J Pediatr Ophthalmol Stra-
bismus . 2019;56(4):222 e228.
46.Mintz-Hittner HA, Knight-Nanan DM, Satriano DR,
Kretzer FL. A small foveal avascular zone may be an historic
mark of prematurity. Ophthalmology . 1999;106(7):1409 e1413 .
47.Takagi M, Maruko I, Yamaguchi A, et al. Foveal abnormal-
ities determined by optical coherence tomography angiographyin children with history of retinopathy of prematurity. Eye.
2019;33(12):1890 e1896 .
48.Yanni SE, Wang J, Chan M, et al. Foveal avascular zone and
foveal pit formation after preterm birth. Br J Ophthalmol .
2012;96(7):961 e966.
49.Bremer DL, Rogers DL, Good WV, et al. Glaucoma in the
Early Treatment for Retinopathy of Prematurity (ETROP)study. J AAPOS . 2012;16(5):449 e452.
50.Robinson J, Cheung AY, Nudleman E, et al. Ocular hyper-
tension in adults with a history of prematurity. Ophthalmol
Retina . 2018;2(6):629 e635.Ophthalmology Volume -, Number -, Month 2021
18
